Classifying Chemical
Compounds

TRY THIS: Classifying Compounds
classifying

All compounds can be classified into one of two groups: organic or
inorganic. For this activity, you will use the older, and partly
correct, meaning of “organic,” which states that organic
compounds are present in or result from living organisms. For
example, a strand of your hair would contain an organic
compound. An inorganic compound is simply one that is not
organic. An example of an inorganic compound is a rusted iron
nail.

1.

wo

 

Think about the matter in the world around and within you,
and consider which matter would contain organic compounds
and which would contain inorganic compounds.

. Make two lists: one with five examples of matter that

contains organic compounds, and one with five examples of
matter that contains inorganic compounds.

. Which list was easier to create? Why do you think this is the

case?

. Beside each organic example, state the original living

organism that contained the organic compound.

 
Classifying Inorganic
Compounds

 

You know that compounds can be ionic or molecular based on how their LEARNING TIP
elements are bonded. But all compounds can also be organic or inorganic, Identifying key words helps readers
determine the most important
concepts in a section. To help you
determine key words, look for words
living organism (Figure 1). However, a significant discovery was made in the that are bolded, used in headings, or

mid-1800s when “organic” compounds were synthesized in the lab from repeated.

 

depending on the kinds of elements within. Inorganic or organic, what’s the
difference? An organic chemical was originally believed to come from a

non-living compounds. Today, compounds that have a high percentage of
carbon by mass are classified as organic compounds; otherwise they are
considered to be inorganic compounds.

 

Figure 1 Organic compounds were first thought to exist only in living organisms.

Almost all of the compounds you have studied so far—such as water, salt,
carbon dioxide, iron(III) oxide (rust), sodium carbonate (washing soda)—
are inorganic compounds. All of the compounds for which you have learned
to name and write formulas are inorganic. Yes, some of these compounds
contain carbon atoms, but the carbon is not considered present in a high
percentage. What then is high percentage carbon? We will answer this
question later in this chapter.

In Chapter 7 you learned that inorganic compounds can be ionic or
molecular based on the bonds that join them together internally. In this
chapter, you will delve further into the study of all compounds and learn
more about their behaviours.

NEL 8.1 Classifying Inorganic Compounds

 
Figure 2 Bonding plays a key role in
the behaviour and, therefore, in the
classification of compounds. From this
diagram, you can see that covalent
bonds can be present in both organic
and inorganic compounds, while ionic
bonds are only present in inorganic
compounds.

Q- Investigation -————_

Classifying Solutions of lonic
Compounds

To perform this investigation, turn to
page 224.

In this investigation, you will look for
some fundamental similarities and
differences among a number of ionic
compounds.

 

As you investigate the nature of these chemicals, you will realize the
significance of the bonding types involved (Figure 2).

 

Inorganic Molecular Compounds
Compounds in this class are

¢ inorganic, so they contain little (at least not in a high percentage) or no
carbon

e molecular, so they have a non-metal bonded to a non-metal to form

molecules

There are some examples of inorganic molecular compounds that are
quite common, but the number of examples is small: water (H,0), ammonia
(NH,), carbon dioxide (CO, considered low percentage carbon), and
laughing gas (N,O). Can you think of some other common everyday
examples that fit this classification? There are not many, are there? Most
inorganic compounds are ionic.

Inorganic lonic Compounds

The classification of inorganic ionic compounds has a long history of
development. Investigation

By the 1500s, early chemists (the alchemists) recognized that one group of
substances shared a common property—a sour taste. These substances
possessed other properties as well. They were called acids from the Latin
word acidus, meaning sour. Another group of substances, called alkalis (or
bases), was prepared from the ashes of wood. Bases had a slippery feel and
were discovered to be effective cleaners.

In the 1600s, the alchemists realized that bases could react with acids and
neutralize or destroy them. The resulting solution contained a new substance
that tasted salty. When the water was evaporated from these solutions, a
crystalline solid remained. These products were appropriately called salts.

Advances in the study of acids, bases, and salts were made when scientists
started looking at the components of acids and bases to conceptually explain
their classification.

202 Unit B Elements, Compounds, and Reactions NEL

 
In the 1800s, the Swedish chemist Svante Arrhenius recognized the
presence of ions in solution and their relationship to acids and bases. These
studies led to what is understood as the Arrhenius definitions of acids, bases,

and salts: acids are substances that release H* ions in solution; bases are

substances that release OH™ ions in solution; salts are substances that

release positive ions and negative ions other than H* and OH~ in solution.

These Arrhenius definitions hold true today for ionic compounds. @

It is a common understanding that, unless otherwise stated, the term

“solution” means that substances are dissolved in water. These water

solutions often are referred to as aqueous (from Latin aqua, water) solutions
and have the designation of (aq). For example, NaCl (aq) represents a
solution formed when sodium chloride (table salt) is dissolved in water.

General Properties of Acids, Bases, and Salts

As you may know from experience, acids like lemon juice taste sour, and
bases like soap taste bitter (Figure 3). Salts, like table salt, do not taste
anything like acids or bases. For obvious safety reasons, when testing for acids,
bases, or salts in a laboratory, you should never rely on taste tests. Chemists
instead use properties like those described in Table 1.

Table 1

General Properties of the Water Solutions of Acids, Bases, and Salts

 

Acids

Bases

Salts

 

© conduct an electric current

© cause chemical indicators
to change colour (for
example, litmus turns red)

react with certain metals
to produce hydrogen gas

 

© conduct an electric current

© cause chemical indicators
to change colour (for
example, litmus turns
blue)

© do not react with certain
metals to produce
hydrogen gas

 

© conduct an electric current

© have no effect on
chemical indicators (for
example, litmus does not
change colour)

¢ do not react with certain
metals to produce
hydrogen gas

 

 

Chemical indicators are commonly used in school laboratories to test for

acids and bases. Chemica’

 

indicators are molecular compounds that have a
specific colour. They can change if they interact with an acid or base and
turn into a slightly different compound with a different colour. Table 2

shows a list of common indicators and their colours in acids and bases. A
colour chart of indicators can also be found in Appendix C6.

Table 2. Some Common Chemical Indicators and Their Colours

 

Chemical indicator

Colour in acid

Colour in base

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

methyl orange red yellow
methyl red red yellow
bromothymol blue yellow blue
litmus red blue
phenolphthalein colourless pink
indigo carmine blue yellow

 

 

NEL

8.1 Classifying Inorganic Compounds

To learn more about Arrhenius
and his contributions, go to
www.science.nelson.com

 

 

Figure 3 Acids and bases are common
household chemicals. Generally
speaking, most food products are acids
and most bases make good cleansing
agents. @)

To test your knowledge of
common household acids and
bases, go to

www.science.nelson.com ©
——— )

 
  
 

203
. -
— H +
H H H
H,0 — > 4H + = OH
Figure 4 A few water molecules form

H* and OH™ ions (about one in a
million).

Acidity

Solutions are said to be acidic, basic, or neutral based on the relative
amounts of H* and OH” ions that they contain. Pure water is always
neutral because it always has an equal number of H* and OH™ ions. This
happens because water is slightly ionic; a very few water molecules still have
a tendency to produce a very small number of H* and OH ions, always

in equal amounts. For this reason, chemists sometimes find it helpful to
think of water as HOH rather than H,O (1 HOH produces 1 H* ion and

1 OH™ ion) (Figure 4). Thus, a conductivity test of pure water will show a
very small flow of electric current.

If an acid (H*) is added to water, the Ht = OH™ balance in water is
disrupted and we end up with more H* than OH. The resulting solution
is said to be acidic. Similarly, if a base (OH ) is added to water, we end
up with more OH” than H* in solution and the solution is considered to
be basic. Adding salt (containing no H* or OH” ) does not affect the
H* = OH 7 balance in water, so the solution remains neutral.

TRY THIS: Electrical Conductivity Tests

Skills Focus: interpreting data

You learned in Chapter 7 that solutions of ionic compounds 1. The electrical conductivity tester was used by inserting the test
conduct electricity, whereas molecular compounds do not. You probes in a variety of materials. The water used was pure or
have also learned that water (H,0) is a molecular compound. In an distilled water (all minerals removed). The conductivity test
investigation, conductivity tests were conducted on water as well results appear in Table 3.

as other compounds in solution. An ammeter was added to the

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

test circuit to measure current flow in milliamperes (mA) (Figure 5). Table 3
The light bulb used was one that required very little power to Compound tested Light bulb Current (mA)
illuminate. table salt (NaCl) in water | very bright 400 mA
table sugar (C,yH,,0,,) | very dim 0.0040 mA
in water
water very dim 0.0040 mA
methanol (CH,0), a liquid | off OmA
alcohol (no water
present)
A. Based on the results of the conductivity tests, which
compounds would you classify as completely ionic or

 

Figure 5

204 Unit B Elements, Compounds, and Reactions

 

 

molecular?

B. Should pure water be classified as completely molecular?
Explain.

C. How do you explain the conductivity of the sugar solution?
Table 4 summarizes the method in which solutions are classified as acidic,
basic, or neutral.

Table 4 Classifying Solutions as Acidic, Basic, or Neutral

 

 

 

 

 

Solution classification Relative ion count Examples

acidic H* > OH7 HCI (aq) provides extra H*
neutral H+ = OH- H,0, NaCl (aq)

basic H* <OH- NaOH (aq) provides extra OH~

 

 

 

 

Acidity is described, then, as a measure of the relative amounts of H* and
OH ina solution. It follows that the higher the relative number of H* ions,
the higher the acidity.

Measuring Acidity (The pH Scale)
Is hydrochloric acid a hazardous chemical? It all depends on how much
hydrochloric acid is present in a given amount of water. A large amount of
HCI in water (concentrated hydrochloric acid) will cause severe skin burns,
and this same acid exists in your stomach for digestive purposes, but in a less
concentrated form. How can we measure these differences in acidity?
Chemists have developed an acidity scale called the pH scale. The normal
range of pH is from 0 to 14, with a pH of 7 being neutral. Solutions with a
pH lower than 7 are acidic, whereas solutions with a pH greater than 7 are
basic. Hydrochloric acid in the stomach has a pH of 1, while concentrated
hydrochloric acid (1M) has a pH of 0. Therefore, concentrated HCl is more
acidic. It is possible to have an extremely acidic solution with a pH lower
than 0 (negative pH value), or an extremely basic solution with a pH greater
than 14. The pH values for a variety of substances are given in Figure 6.

 

'
(Q
1 iS
1 Use
; 1 1 i =
1 1 1 ' 1
1 1 1 1 1
! ! : ' !
+++ + + + +
pHO 1 2 3 4 5
RSS @ 2 2 z
&. RS ¥ ee Xe
CoO. S& Os
& e ro) Fo
x x2 SS
S s

Figure 6 The pH scale allows chemists to quickly determine the acidity of solutions.

NEL 8.1 Classifying Inorganic Compounds

 

LEARNING TIP
When you are reading difficult text, it
is a good habit to paraphrase (say in
your own words) difficult passages.
Ask yourself, “Am | making good use
of the tables and figures provided and
remembering to stop and reread
difficult passages?”

 

Rui P

Protecting the Stomach

 

Your stomach has mechanisms to
stop it from being damaged by the
high acidity of the hydrochloric acid in
it. The stomach wall is protected by a
fairly thick coat of mucus. The cells in
this mucus secrete a base that
neutralizes the acid. If hydrochloric
acid gets through to the stomach
wall, a person can develop gastric
ulcers.

 
Did You )
KNOW
The pH Scale

The pH scale was developed in 1909.
The symbol “pH” was chosen to
represent the “power of Hydrogen,”
to describe the concentration of H*
ions in solution. Think of the pH scale
as a “backwards” scale—the lower
the pH, the higher the number of H*
ions, and the higher the acidity.

 

 

Figure 7 A pH meter can be used to
accurately measure the acidity of a
solution.

To learn how to make a pH test
chemical at home, go to

e www.science.nelson.com ico}

 

The pH scale for measuring acidity has mathematical similarities to the
Richter scale that is used for measuring earthquakes. Both scales are based
on logarithms (powers of 10) so that every 1 point move on the Richter or
pH scale represents 10 times more or less shaking force or acidity,
respectively. A solution with a pH of 4 has 10 times more H™ ions (10 times
more acidic) than one with a pH of 5. A solution with a pH of 3 is 100 times
more acidic than a pH of 5 (Table 5).

Table 5 Acidity and pH

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Substance pH Relative acidity (compared with water)
pure water 7 neutral

human saliva 6 10 (10') times more acidic than water

black coffee 5 100 (102) times more acidic than water
tomato juice 4 1000 (103) times more acidic than water

soft drink 3 10 000 (104) times more acidic than water
lemon juice 2 100 000 (10°) times more acidic than water
stomach acid 1 1 000 000 (108) times more acidic than water

 

 

 

 

A solution’s pH can be directly measured with an electronic instrument
called a pH meter (Figure 7) or with pH paper. The pH paper will display a
certain colour when immersed in a solution. When that colour is matched to
a colour chart for the pH paper, the solution’s pH can be approximated
(Figure 8).

 

 

acids

 

Jeanau | w

 

 

 

 

Figure 8 The left side of this strip of pH paper was immersed in a solution. The strip has turned
green and indicates that the solution's pH is close to 9. @

Naming Acids
Many of the commercial acids you encounter in the chemistry lab originate
as manufactured gases. Gases are denoted by using (g) after their formulas.
These particular gases readily dissolve in water and become acidic solutions.
Some examples appear in Table 6.

The examples in Table 6 suggest that a system exists for naming acids.
Some names include the term “hydro”; some do not. Some names end in
“ic”; some end in “ous.”

206 Unit B Elements, Compounds, and Reactions NEL

 

 
Table 6 Names for Some Common Acids and Their Gas Origins

 

Chemical name

Gas dissolved in
water to form

Chemical name

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Acid name | Gas of gas acid of solution
hydrochloric | HCl (g) | hydrogen chloride HCI (aq) hydrogen chloride
acid

nitric acid NO, (g) | nitrogen dioxide HNO, (aq) hydrogen nitrate
sulfurous SO, (g) | sulfur dioxide H,$03 (aq) hydrogen sulfite
acid

 

 

As with all chemical compounds, the acid names are derived from the

acids’ chemical formulas. The rules for naming acids are summarized in the
flow chart in Figure 9.

   

    
 

contains “ate” ion

contains “ite” ion

Figure 9 An acid’s name is derived from the acid’s chemical formula.

Notice that the negative ions in hydro
ion names become

«se »

 

contains

  

ide” ion

ic acids are “ide” ions, and these
as in hydrochloric acid. There is no general rule as to

how much of the ion name is retained. For example, the nitrate ion in
HNO, leads to nitric acid, whereas the sulfite ion in H,SO, leads to
sulfurous acid, not sulfous acid. Furthermore, an acid such as HI is named
hydriodic acid, simply because it is easier to say than hydroiodic acid. Do
not be concerned with these little quirks, as long as you can follow the
general rules and write the proper prefixes and suffixes for acid names.

8.1 Classifying Inorganic Compounds

Riv P

Phase Designations

 

Chemists use symbols after chemical
formulas to describe the phases of
matter when it is relevant. Some
common phase designations are:

(s) solid: NaCl (s) (table salt crystals)
(I) liquid: NaCl (I) (liquid table salt,
melted; not common)

(g) gas: He (g) (helium gas)

(aq) aqueous: NaCl (aq) (table salt
dissolved in water)

LEARNING TIP
As you read Figure 9, create a picture
in your mind. Cover the figure and
recall your picture. Compare your
picture with the information in

Figure 9. Did you leave out any
important information? If so, repeat
the strategy.

 

 
Naming Bases and Salts
You have already learned the IUPAC rules for naming bases and salts when
you learned about naming ionic compounds. Some examples appear in

 

 

 

 

 

Table 7.

Table 7 lonic Compound Naming Rules for Bases and Salts
lonic compound Classification Chemical name
NaNO; salt sodium nitrate
KCl salt potassium chloride
NaOH base sodium hydroxide
Ca(OH), base calcium hydroxide

 

 

 

 

 

TRY THIS: Metal and Non-Metal Oxide Solutions (A Periodic Trend)

Skills Focus: interpreting data, classifying

Oxygen is reactive with many of the elements in the Periodic Table. 2. Complete Table 8 by classifying each solution as acidic, basic,
We observe this on a daily basis with metals such as iron and or neutral. (See Table 2 on page 203 for indicator colours.)
copper. Once reacted with oxygen, these metals join a class of A. Examine the classifications in Table 8 and locate the elements
compounds called oxides, so in these cases, iron(II) oxide and involved in the Periodic Table. State a simplified periodic trend
copper(I!) oxide are formed. Non-metals also react both naturally that appears to exist with solutions of metal and non-metal
and in commercial situations with oxygen to form oxide oxides.

EoTpoune® stele cali leside/ane cular dlienide: B. Write the chemical formula for carbon dioxide. If you tested a
Interestingly, these commonly produced oxides often are open to solution of carbon dioxide with bromothymol blue, would the
the environment and are then exposed to water as water vapour solution be acidic, basic, or neutral?

 

or rain. What happens next? Are new substances created once

. we a . C. Write the chemical formula for sodium oxide. If you tested a
again? If so, do they exhibit familiar properties?

solution of sodium oxide with bromothymol blue, would the

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. Tests were done on various solutions with bromothymol blue solution be acidic, basic, or neutral?
indicator solution and the results are recorded in Table 8.
Table 8
Bromothymol
Oxide in water blue test Classification
MgO blue
CaO blue
SO, yellow
NO, yellow

 

 

 

 

 

208 Unit B Elements, Compounds, and Reactions NEL

 
   

. In the early years of chemistry, why were certain

compounds considered to be organic?

. Give an example of a substance that would fit

the original definition of an organic chemical.

State a modern definition of an organic

compound.

(a) What property do acids, bases, and salts
have in common?

(b) What is the effect of an acid on blue litmus
paper?

(c) What is the effect of a base on blue litmus
paper?

(d) What would you expect to happen if an iron
nail were placed in hydrochloric acid?

Give the Arrhenius definitions for acids, bases,

and salts.

Classify each of the following substances as an

acid, a base, or a salt.

(a) LiOH

(b) KNO,

(c) Sr(OH),

(d) HBr

(e) KCl

(f) H,SO,

(g) Ca(OH),

(h) HNO,

(a) Which two ions are present in very small
amounts in any sample of pure water?

(b) What is a good alternative chemical formula
for water, rather than H,O? Why?

(c) With respect to ion count, why is water
considered to be neutral?

How do the number of Ht and OH™ ions

compare after

(a) HI is added to water?

(b) KBr is added to water?

(c) KOH is added to water?

You test a solution with bromothymol blue
indicator solution and the indicator turns
yellow. What can you conclude about the
relative H* and OH ion count?

ike

12.

13.

14,

is.

16.

( CHECK YOUR Understanding

10.

Give some examples of where the term pH is
used in your everyday life.

Make a sketch of the pH scale and label it with
pH values. Show the areas that represent acidic,
basic, and neutral solutions.

What would you expect the pH value for
grapefruit juice to be? (>7, 7, <7)

Write the acid name for each of the following
ionic compounds.

(d) HNO,

Write the chemical formula for each of the
following acids.

(a) hydrocyanic acid

(b) oxalic acid

(c) chlorous acid

(d) nitric acid

Write the acid name or chemical formula for
each of the following.

(a) HBr

(b) sulfurous acid

(c) HClO,

(d) phosphoric acid

 

 

First, classify each of the following substances as
an acid, a base, or a salt. Then, write the name
or chemical formula. If the substance is an acid,
write the acid name.

(a) potassium hydroxide

(b) KNO,

(c) Mg(OH),

(d) HI

(e) sodium sulfate

(f) HClO,

(g) aluminum hydroxide

(h) H,CrO,

8.1 Classifying Inorganic Compounds

 
 

To learn more about the work
of G.N. Lewis, go to
www.science.nelson.com Q

e

 

LEARNING TIP
Are you able to explain the similarities
and differences between Bohr's and
Lewis's atomic models? If not,
re-examine Figures 1 and 2. What
type of bonding are Lewis diagrams
useful for representing?

electron dot

(a) *

Figure 2 Lewis diagrams showing
electron dots for the valence electrons
of (a) oxygen and (b) argon atoms

(b) ee

 

Another Look at Bonding—
Lewis Diagrams

You have learned that bonding types (ionic and covalent) can be used to
classify all compounds. Ionic compounds can be further classified as acids,
bases, and salts based on their compositions. Molecular compounds can be
further classified based on their atomic arrangements or structures. In order
to gain an understanding of how atoms are arranged in molecules, we will
investigate Lewis diagrams.

In the early 1900s, the American G.N. Lewis developed a system of
arranging dots around the symbol of an element to represent an atom’s
valence electrons as it prepares to bond. Lewis reasoned that, for studies of
bonding, there was no need to represent any of the other subatomic particles
(protons, neutrons, or other electrons) as only valence electrons are involved
in bonding. Looking at the atomic model proposed by Bohr and the Lewis
diagram, you will notice striking similarities (Figure 1). @

Fg
ww sel only valence
+ @ ) ¢ Fos electrons are
\ ‘ J) oe represented

(a) (b)

Figure 1 (a) A Bohr diagram of the fluorine atom is very similar to (b) a Lewis diagram.

Lewis Diagrams and Covalent Bonds

You might consider a Lewis diagram as a simpler version of a Bohr diagram
that has only valence electrons illustrated. However, there is a subtle (slight)
difference in how the valence electrons are arranged. The Bohr model
describes an atom in its natural state, whereas a Lewis model describes an
atom as it prepares to bond with other atoms. The Lewis model shows that
when an atom prepares to form a covalent bond, its valence electrons
arrange themselves as single electrons whenever possible. A single electron is
then able to pair with another single electron from another atom to form a
shared pair, or bonding pair, of electrons. Lewis diagrams are also called
electron dot diagrams since the valence electrons are designated by dots.
However, symbols other than dots are used if they provide a better
understanding of bonding between atoms.

A Lewis diagram for an oxygen atom shows the 6 valence electrons as
dots surrounding the symbol for oxygen, with 2 single valence electrons
(Figure 2(a)). An atom of argon (noble gas) has a complete valence shell of
8 valence electrons so it has no single valence electrons (Figure 2(b)).

PAT) Unit B Elements, Compounds, and Reactions NEL

 
Lewis Diagrams for Atoms
Drawing Lewis diagrams for atoms is easy by following a few steps.

Example 1: A Lewis diagram for a chlorine atom.

1. Determine the number of valence electrons. The number of valence
electrons can easily be determined from the group (family) number in
the Periodic Table. Since we will restrict ourselves to the first
20 elements, we can use the following method:

(a) Elements in Groups 1 and 2 have 1 or 2 valence electrons,
respectively.

(b) Elements in Groups 13 through 18 have 3 to 8 valence electrons
based on the group number. For example, an element such as
chlorine in group 17 has 7 valence electrons.

2. Arrange the valence electrons as dots around the atom’s symbol. First

place 2 valence electrons together as paired electrons and then place up
to 3 valence electrons as unpaired electrons equally around the valence

shell. If there are more valence electrons, then begin to double up the
unpaired electrons to make paired electrons (Figure 3).

 

 

Figure 3 Placing 7 valence electrons for Cl in a Lewis diagram

Example 2: A Lewis diagram for a boron atom.
Boron has 3 valence electrons.

2. Place 2 valence electrons together as paired electrons and the third as
an unpaired electron. This illustrates boron in its natural state. But
Lewis diagrams show electrons ready to bond, so wherever possible,
electrons are placed singly. Therefore, one of the paired valence
electrons is moved to show all 3 valence electrons as unpaired (single)
electrons, ready for bonding (Figure 4). This model of “changing
places” closely resembles the modern atomic theory studied in more
advanced courses.

  

Figure 4 Placing 3 valence electrons for B in a Lewis diagram

NEL 8.2 Another Look at Bonding—Lewis Diagrams

STUDY TIP
Summarizing helps you to monitor
your understanding of what you read.
As you read Example 1, identify the
main point in each step. Complete the
statement, “This step tells me to..."
Write each step in a point-form note
ona study card. Include a visual on
the back of your study card. You can
use this study card later to help you
prepare for a chapter test.

 

 

 
LEARNING TIP
When forming Lewis diagrams for
molecules, it helps to visualize the dots
arranged in pairs with the bonding
pairs placed between the atoms that
they connect and the lone pairs at
different sides of the atomic symbol.

To practise interpreting Lewis
diagrams, go to

www.science.nelson.com =~
Oe @

 

A quick method is to place electrons singly equally around the shell until 4
are placed, after which they are seated in pairs. This method works, but it is
not supported by modern atomic theory.

Lewis Diagrams for Molecules

As you learned earlier, each atom has a tendency to complete its valence shell
when bonding. A complete valence shell is one that matches its nearest noble
gas. All noble gases have 8 valence electrons, except helium, which has 2.
This is known as the octet rule.

To draw a Lewis diagram for a molecule, you must first be given the
molecular formula. Atoms are then connected to one another by pairs of
shared electrons, or bonding pairs. Consider the example for water
(Figure 5). The molecular formula is H,O. Each of the 2 hydrogen atoms has
1 valence electron. The oxygen atom has 6 valence electrons. (Note that “x”
is used rather than dots for the hydrogen electrons. This is done simply to
differentiate between the hydrogen and oxygen electrons.) By following the
octet rule, the Lewis diagram shows how the 2 hydrogen atoms bond with
the oxygen atom.

lone

. | electron
HO H ‘QO: —» HQ: P"
ponding H

pairs

 

Figure 5 A Lewis diagram for water (H,0)

The purpose of a Lewis diagram is to illustrate that the formation of these
covalent molecules is possible. In Figure 5, you can see that arranging the
bonding atoms in this manner leads to all atoms having complete valence
shells as a result of bonding pairs of electrons. Oxygen ends up complete
with 8 valence electrons (with 2 bonding pairs), and each hydrogen atom
ends up complete with 2 valence electrons (with 1 bonding pair). As a result,
the octet rule is satisfied for all atoms. Each bonding pair of electrons forms
a covalent chemical bond. Note that the other pairs of electrons are not
involved. These lone electron pairs do not form bonds. ®

Other carefully selected covalent molecules such as ammonia (NH;) can
be represented by Lewis diagrams (Figure 6).

 

3 bonding pairs

Figure 6 In the Lewis diagram for NH; each N atom obtains 8 valence electrons and each H atom
obtains 2 valence electrons, thereby satisfying the octet rule.

212 Unit B Elements, Compounds, and Reactions NEL

 
For simplification, the bonding pair of electrons is often replaced by a line
to represent a single covalent bond (Figure 7).

H—N—H
|
H

Figure 7 A simplified Lewis diagram for NH, shows each bonding pair of electrons as a line
representing a covalent bond.

Common covalent molecules such as carbon dioxide require an introduction
to double bonds, which is beyond the scope of our studies.

Lewis Diagrams for lonic Compounds

Lewis diagrams can also be drawn for ionic compounds, but they simply
mimic (imitate) the electron transfer that can be shown in a Bohr diagram
(Figure 8). Since formulas for ionic compounds are predictable based on ion
charge, we seldom rely on Lewis diagrams to help us understand the ionic
bonds that exist. Lewis diagrams are more commonly used to explain
covalently bonded compounds whose formulas cannot be predicted.

 

@ NaO

Figure 8 (a) A Lewis diagram for ionic compounds shows how the valence shells are completed by
electron transfer. (b) This same transfer is shown in the Bohr diagram. (c) However, formulas for ionic
compounds can be predicted from the combining ion charges.

NEL 8.2 Another Look at Bonding—Lewis Diagrams

 
   

1. What type of bonding are Lewis diagrams useful

for representing?

. State the number of valence electrons for each

of the following elements:

a) carbon (C)

b) argon (Ar)

c) lithium (Li)

d) magnesium (Mg)

e) hydrogen (H)

f) helium (He)

g) sulfur (S)

h) phosphorus (P)

. Copy Table 1 in your notebook, leaving large
spaces for drawing the diagrams. Complete the
second and third columns for all of the
elements. Complete the fourth column for those
elements that will form ions.

 

Table 1

 

Bohr
diagrams
for atoms

Lewis
diagrams
for ions

Lewis
diagrams

Element for atoms

 

hydrogen

 

magnesium

 

oxygen

 

sulfur

 

carbon

 

boron

 

beryllium

 

potassium

 

helium

 

 

 

 

 

 

nitrogen

 

Unit B Elements, Compounds, and Reactions

 

CHECK YOUR Understanding

4,

 

Draw Lewis diagrams for each of the following
molecules. Use “x” to represent electrons for the
second element.

(a) HCl

(b) F,

(c) H,O

(d) carbon tetrachloride

(e) sulfur difluoride

(f) nitrogen trichloride

In your notebook, draw Lewis diagrams that
will correct the errors in the following Lewis
diagrams.

(a) = Sle

(b) ‘He

4 :
H
(d) NF, :F=NiF:

Why is it uncommon to draw Lewis diagrams

for ionic compounds?

A. Lewis diagrams can only illustrate covalent
bonding.

B. Ionic compounds cannot be represented by
Lewis diagrams.

C. Ionic compounds involve electron transfer,
not electron sharing.

D. Formulas for ionic compounds are
predictable and understandable based on
ion charges.
Organic Compounds

 

Early chemists believed that certain chemicals were only found in living
organisms. These chemicals were appropriately called organic chemicals
since they came from organisms. It was later discovered that some of these
“organic” chemicals could be synthesized in the lab from non-living things.
Nevertheless, the name “organic” stuck.

It was the German chemist Friedrich Wohler (Figure 1) who, in the 1800s,
first converted an inorganic chemical into urea, (NH,),CO. Urea is a
compound that can be isolated from urine. Urea was recognized as organic
by all chemists and was believed to be manufactured only by living
organisms.

Today, the sheer number of known organic compounds is staggering!
Chemists estimate that 10 million compounds have been discovered so far,
and 9 million of those are organic compounds. Living things are made up of
thousands of different organic compounds. After studying organic
compounds from nature, chemists and engineers often attempt to duplicate
these compounds in the laboratory. The result is a wide variety of synthetic
chemicals that have become part of our daily lives, such as fuels, fabrics,
plastics, and medicines. An estimated 250 000 new organic compounds are
synthesized in research laboratories every year.

Modern organic chemistry is often described as the chemistry of carbon
compounds. Organic compounds are molecular compounds that have
carbon atoms as their basis. Organic molecules contain C, H, and sometimes
O, N, and other non-metals, and they have covalent bonds. A few examples
of organic compounds are listed in Table 1. Notice that carbon and
hydrogen atoms are always present.

Table 1 A Few Common Organic Compounds

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Organic compound Name Use

CH, methane, natural gas house heating

CyHy9 butane lighter fluid

CoHig octane gasoline component

CH30H methanol windshield washer antifreeze
C,H,OH ethanol alcoholic beverages, gasoline additive

 

 

Not all compounds that contain carbon are organic. Thus, carbon dioxide
(CO,) with no H, and sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO,) with the metal Na,
are both inorganic compounds. On the other hand, methane (CH,) and
ethanol (C,H,OH) are both examples of organic compounds.

8.3 Organic Compounds

 

Figure 1 Friedrich Wohler (Germany) is
considered the “father” of modern
organic chemistry.

Did You )
KNOW
What Is Organic?

The term “organic” has different
meanings depending on the context
in which it is used. Today you hear
phrases such as “organic fruit and
vegetables.” In this case the term
“organic” is not used as a chemistry
term. An organic apple suggests that
the conditions in which the apple was
grown were controlled to avoid the
use of manufactured fertilizers.
However, a chemist might say that all
apples are organic since they contain
organic compounds.

 

 
  
 

215
Riv P

 

Silicon

The only element with similar
bonding abilities to carbon is the
element silicon (Si). This is evident in
the fact that silicon appears in the
many compounds contained in dirt,
soil, sand, and rocks. Notice its
position in the Periodic Table in
relation to carbon.

Sometimes it is sufficient to say that organic compounds have a high
percentage of carbon, but there is no hard-and-fast rule as to what
constitutes a high percentage. Here are some percentages for the above
examples, using mass numbers:

CO i x 100 % = 27 % C inorganic
2 44

NaHCO, a < 100 % = 14% C inorganic

it X< 100% = 75% C_ organic
4 16
24 .
C,H;OH 16 xX 100% = 52% C_ organic
In most cases, if you notice C and more than one H in the formula, along
with no metals, you can expect the compound to be organic.

What's So Special About Carbon?

Carbon has the unique ability to form several bonds with other atoms as
well as with itself. This is due to the fact that carbon has 4 valence electrons.
The 4 valence electrons allow carbon atoms to form chains of various
lengths, and these chains can then have all types of branches. Each unpaired
valence electron in carbon is capable of pairing up with another single
electron from a different atom such as hydrogen. This bonding pair of
electrons forms a covalent chemical bond (Figure 2).

carbon hydrogen H i
: x ox simplify
CH, °C: H —= H:Cs:H ——» H—C—-H
can form can form H |
4 bonds 1 bond H

Figure 2 Valence electron dots for C and H show how these elements can be arranged and bond to
form a methane molecule, CH,. Since all bonds are shared electron pairs, it follows that all organic
compounds are molecular.

Structural Formulas

Simplified Lewis diagrams, also called structural formulas, can be drawn to
help visualize organic molecules (Figure 3). Chemists find that structural
formulas are very useful for studying organic compounds. These formulas
not only show the number of atoms in each organic molecule, but also the
arrangement of these atoms. In many cases, the structure of the molecule
helps chemists understand that particular compound’s properties and
behaviour.

216 Unit B Elements, Compounds, and Reactions NEL

 
(a) methane

(b) butane

(c) octane

CH, H—C—H

LEARNING TIP
Keep in mind this set of basic rules by
which you can form Lewis structures.
Bonds are pairs of electrons shared
between two atoms. Most covalently
bonded atoms (except hydrogen) have
a filled octet of balanced electrons.

 

 

CyH io H-=€--€ —G

 

CeHis H—-€-G—G

 

 

 

 

H H H

 

H

C—H

H

H H H H H

C é C é C—-H
Lb oy ¢

H

Figure 3 Structural formulas for (a) methane, (b) butane, and (c) octane

When oxygen bonds within organic molecules it requires 2 bonds
(2 bonding pairs) in order to fill its valence shell. The Lewis diagrams and
structural formulas for the oxygen-containing compounds methanol and
ethanol are shown in Figure 4. Notice that structural formulas do not show
any non-bonding electron dots such as those on O atoms. In structural
formulas, it is understood that the valence shells are complete for each atom.

methanol

CH;OH

ethanol

C,HsOH

i. mM
can form can form
4 bonds 1 bond

H
H—C—O—-H
H
HH
——
H—C—C—O—H
l se

 

Lewis Diagrams

“O-
can form
2 bonds

 

Structural Formulas

Figure 4 Structural formulas leave out the non-bonding electron dots.

8.3 Organic Compounds

 
Chemists reason that different compounds have different properties and
should have different compositions. Usually the composition of a compound
is described by its chemical formula. But sometimes the chemical formula
does not help describe differences in organic compounds. For example, ether

Ta:leare how te Grganic and ethanol both have the same chemical (molecular) formula (C,H,O).

compound ethanol could help

fuel the future, listen to the Ether is a highly explosive liquid, and can be used as an anesthetic. Ethanol
audio clip at is the alcohol found in alcoholic beverages. They are from different organic
eq—Wwwscience.nelson.com © families and have quite different properties. How can they both be C,H,O? @

TRY THIS: Structural Formulas

Skills Focus: creating models

 

 

 

Organic chemists rely on structural formulas to better describe Table 2
composition and properties of organic molecules. A structural Organic
formula uses a bond line to show a bonding pair of electrons, as Organic | Molecular molecular
shown in the structural formulas for ethanol and ether in Table 2. compound formula | Structural formula formula
1. Sketch structural formulas for the following organic ethanol C,H. H H CH3CH,OH
compounds. Recall that each C atom has 4 bond lines, each |
O atom has 2, and each H atom has 1. H—C—G—0 —H
(0) ho
(b) CH,O ether |C,H,0 H H  |CH,OCH,
(c) CgHy9 (sketch two different structures) | |
(d) C AG (sketch three different structures) H— | —Oo ~4 —H
(e) C,H, 0 (sketch seven different structures) H H

 

 

 

 

 

 

Classifying Organic Compounds

A very elaborate scheme has been developed for classifying organic
compounds. The classification of these compounds into families is based on
their properties and molecular structures. Only a few of these families are
illustrated in Table 3. The simplest of all organic compounds are the
hydrocarbons since, as their name suggests, they only contain the elements
hydrogen and carbon. You may have heard of methane, propane, butane,
and octane (Figure 5). Note the similarities in their names.

Figure 5 Some of the hydrocarbons
may be familiar to you. (a) Propane
torches are used when soldering pipes.
(b) Octane is an important component
of gasoline. (a)

  

Unit B Elements, Compounds, and Reactions NEL

 
Table 3 Some Families of Organic Compounds

 

Family name Sample compound name _| Structural formula

 

hydrocarbons propane H H oH

 

alcohols ethanol H H

 

 

ethers dimethyl ether H H

 

 

 

 

 

 

Sources of Organic Compounds

Organic compounds are naturally occurring or synthetic. Many natural
organic compounds are produced by plants during photosynthesis. The
plants take in carbon dioxide, CO, (the source of the carbon for the carbon
compounds) from the air. They react CO, with H,O to produce organic
molecules. You know these organic compounds as carbohydrates, sugars,
proteins, and fats. Animals then eat the plants and manufacture more
organic compounds in more chemical reactions. Humans eat both carbon-
containing plants and animals and eventually return the carbon to the
ground and the air. This cycle of carbon starting in the air and eventually
returning to the air is called the carbon cycle.

Another major source of natural organic compounds comes from deep

 

within Earth. Crude oil and natural gas deposits formed millions of years / =

ago when plant and animal remains were subjected to enormous forces of ‘ :

heat and pressure. These natural deposits contain mixtures of organic cenit SS
compounds that are nowadays separated into their component parts at gas

processing plants and oil refineries (Figure 6). Many of the components in Figure 6 An oil refinery

these mixtures are simple hydrocarbons such as methane, propane, butane,
and octane. They are primarily separated to be used as fuels, but often these

simple molecules are used as building blocks by chemists to synthesize apy caraenars ahOUENONLEIL

larger, more complex molecules. These small molecules are like pieces of refineries work, go to

LEGO to a chemist! @ @_Www.science.nelson.com Q
*~

 

 
  
 

NEL 8.3 Organic Compounds 219
 

(c)

   

. State a modern definition of organic chemistry.

. Why was the term “organic” originally chosen?

Give an example of an original organic
substance.

. For each photo below, consider the substances
that make up the object. List those substances
that you think are organic and those that you
think are inorganic.

(b)

 

(d)

 

220

. What two elements are always common to

organic compounds?

. Is washing soda (Na,CO,) considered to be

organic? State two reasons why or why not.

. Explain what makes carbon special when it

bonds with other elements.

. Draw a Lewis diagram of carbon, and a Lewis

diagram of hydrogen.

. (a) Draw a Lewis diagram to illustrate how a

molecule of propane (C,H,) can exist.
(b) Draw a structural formula for a molecule of
propane.

Unit B Elements, Compounds, and Reactions

 

oy

10.

11.
12.

CHECK YOUR Understanding

 

Draw five different structural formulas for
CoHy4-

Identify the errors in the following structural
formulas. In your notebook, draw the correct

structural formulas.

 

(a) H HHH H
| \/ | |
CH) =H-C—C—C—C—-H
| | /\ |
H HHHH
(b) H H
| |
CaHip =H-C—C=C—-H
|
H—C—H
H
(0) H H H
| | |
C;H3 H—C—C—C=0

What is a major source of organic molecules?

What type of industrial plant (factory) is used
to separate mixtures of organic compounds?
The world around us is made of many different materials with
distinct chemical structures. Some are natural, such as starch,
wool, and silk, while others are synthetic, such as plastic pop
bottles, latex paint, and superglue. What they have in common is
that they are all made of giant molecules!

All life is made possible because of
giant molecules called polymers. A
polymer consists of long chains
composed of small repeating molecular
units called monomers. Polymers usually
consist of thousands of monomers
covalently bonded together. They can be
many millions of times larger than
simple molecules such as water or
carbon dioxide. There are three major
ypes of biological giant molecules:
proteins, carbohydrates, and nucleic
acids. Proteins are long chains of amino
acids, such as keratins that form our
ingernails and hair. Carbohydrates are
chains of sugars that form substances
such as cotton, cellulose (the wood fibre
of trees), or starches for storing energy.
ucleic acids are chains of nucleotides
hat take the form of DNA or RNA.
Scientists have also created a large
variety of synthetic polymers such as
nylon, plastic, and rubber. Of particular
interest to chemists today, is how to
produce a synthetic equivalent of spider
silk. Spider silk is a fine protein polymer
that is known for its strength and
elasticity. It is one of the strongest
natural fibres, and gram for gram, is six
times stronger than steel (Figure 1).
Chemists have already created
materials that are either very strong or
very stretchy, but have not been able to

‘N

 

 

 

 

 

 

achieve both qualities in the same
material. Recently, chemists have
determined that the secret behind the
combined strength and flexibility of
spider silk lies in the arrangement of the
amino acids.
Moreover, chemists are fascinated
with the spider's ability to crea
different types of silk that serve different
functions. Spiders start a web with
dragline silk that creates an incredibly
strong framework. The web is then
rewoven with a slightly more flexible
and sticky molecular structure called
capture silk. Once the prey is captured
in the web, the spider produces another

o

 

 

 

ype of polymer to wrap around the
rapped insect (Figure 2).

Spider silk may hold lots of promise
or creating tear-resistant textiles and
high-strength fibres needed for
ightweight bulletproof gear. More
interestingly, spider silk is chemically
unreactive, water insoluble, and resistant
© bacteria and fungi. This makes it ideal
or biomedical applications, including
sutures, artificial tendons and ligaments,
and biomedical devices. Synthetic fibres
are often used in place of natural
materials, since they are strong, light,
elastic, and inexpensive.

 

 

 

Figure 1 Individual fibres of
spider silk

 

Figure 2 A spider uses a third type of silk to wrap its captured prey.

 
CC I I Ee

ee

 
  

Explore an Issue

 

DECISION MAKING SKILLS a. _

O Defining the Issue @ Analyzing the Issue @ Communicating
@ Researching @ Defending a Decision O Evaluating
© Identifying Alternatives

The Great Organic Debate: Healthier—
Yes or No?

The term “organic” has different meanings even within the scientific
community. An organic chemist believes that organic compounds are
defined as carbon based, whereas an agricultural scientist identifies organic
foods as naturally grown according to certain specifications. But even after
settling on a common definition, scientists still cannot agree on the role of
organic food production in modern agriculture.

The Issue: Naturally Grown Foods Are Healthier

What role do synthetic chemicals play in food production and how do these
foods affect your health? The world population is constantly increasing and
travel is much more accessible than in the past. As a result, scientists are not
only faced with the challenge of providing an adequate food supply, but also
with controlling disease. Naturally grown foods are safe to produce and
consume, but are they healthier and can their rate of production meet world
needs? What are the alternatives and are they safe?

Statement
People should eat only organic foods.

Background to the Issue

Organic Farming

All foods contain organic compounds, but an organic food is one that has
been grown in certain soil conditions. “Organic farming” refers to crops that
have been grown without using any synthetic fertilizers or pesticides

(Figure 1). Organic farming is often considered the most natural way to
farm in the sense that it relies solely on natural fertilizers (manure) and
natural methods of controlling pests and disease. Organic farming also
includes growing plants, whose fibres are used in clothing, and the growing
of grapes, which are used to make organic wines.

 

Farmers can grow certified organic crops by meeting strict standards,
Figure 1 Produce labelled “organic” is including proper buffer fields between the organic field and any non-organic
grown using only natural fertilizers and fields (preventing non-organic pollen from fertilizing organic crops). All
methods. crops that are to be sold as organic must be inspected and certified.

222 Unit B Elements, Compounds, and Reactions NEL

 
 

Non-Organic Farming

According to public attitudes, organic food is the healthy option, both for
people and the environment. But is organic food really as good as we think?
One argument is that organic farming can lead to the risk of contamination
with dangerous natural bacteria and mould toxins. Increased levels of
natural pesticide found in organic produce could even be as dangerous as
synthetic chemicals.

Conventional (non-organic) farming has utilized synthetic chemicals such
as fertilizers and pesticides since their development (Figure 2). Fertilizers
containing elemental nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium have been
manufactured for the past one hundred years. Plants depend on nitrogen for
leaf and stem growth, phosphorus for root development and blooms, and
potassium for roots and general vigour.

Take a Position
1. Carefully read the statement and background information.

2. Your teacher will assign you to a group. Your group will then be divided
into two subgroups: one that will support the statement and one that
will oppose it.

3. With your subgroup, research the topics of organic and non-organic
foods and how chemistry is involved in agriculture. Sources of
information could include newspaper or journal articles, textbooks,
library references, and the Internet.

www.science.nelson.com Q

 

Communicate Your Position

1. Prepare a presentation that supports your position on organic versus
non-organic foods. Prepare a list of pros and cons, and establish an
argument for how your pros outweigh your cons. Consider, for
example:

(a) What types of chemicals are used and what are their benefits and
hazards?

(b) What effects do organic and inorganic foods have on human
health?

(c) What effects do the organic and inorganic farming practices have
on human and environmental health?

(d) How available and affordable are organic and inorganic farming
practices throughout the world?

2. Present and defend your position in a group debate.

 

Figure 2 In conventional farming,
synthetic fertilizers are sprayed on crops

to help their growth.

8.4 Explore an Issue

 
 
  

Classifying Solutions of lonic
Compounds

A compound is said to be ionic if it releases positive
and negative ions when dissolved in water. A simple
laboratory test is to measure the electrical
conductivity of the solution formed because ionic
solutions are relatively good conductors. Beyond the
fact that ionic solutions conduct electricity, are there
other interesting properties that separate these
solutions into different groups? What further tests
can be used?

Questions
What tests can be used to classify solutions of ionic
compounds into groups? How can these groups be

defined?

Experimental Design

In this investigation, you will be given some ionic
solutions of compounds to test. In Part I, you will
test several unknown solutions and note some of
their properties. You will use the similarity of
properties to classify these solutions into three
groups. Then, the identities of the compounds in the
solutions will be revealed and you will write
definitions that explain why each compound belongs
in its particular group.

In Part II of this investigation, you will test several
known household compounds. From the results you
obtain and information provided, you will use your
definitions from Part I to classify these compounds.

 

Always wear eye protection when working with any
of these solutions. Some of these chemicals can be

corrosive to skin, eyes, and clothing. If any solution
splashes on skin or in eyes, flush immediately with
plenty of cold water, and inform your teacher. Wash
away any spills on any other surface with plenty of
water.

 

 

Bromothymol blue can stain clothing. Use with care.

 

224

Unit B Elements, Compounds, and Reactions

 

Investigation

 

INQUIRY SKILLS »

O Questioning @ Conducting @ Evaluating

O Hypothesizing @ Recording @ Synthesizing
O Predicting @ Analyzing @ Communicating
O Planning

Materials

e safety goggles

¢ 6 small test tubes (10 mm X 75 mm)

e water soluble marker

e set of 6 unknown solutions (labelled A-F)
¢ 6 dropping pipettes

e test tube rack

¢ spot plate or glass square (10 cm X 10 cm)

dropping bottles of phenolphthalein solution and
bromothymol blue solution

e red litmus paper

blue litmus paper
e magnesium ribbon

e set of 6 household solutions (vinegar, oven cleaner,
table salt, colourless carbonated drink, lemon
juice, milk of magnesia)

Procedure
Part I: Tests of the Unknown Solutions

1. Follow the safety instructions provided by your
teacher and put on your safety goggles.

2. Label six small test tubes A to F with a water
soluble marker. Obtain a sample of each of the
six unknown solutions from your teacher and
fill each test tube approximately half full. Place a
dropping pipette in each test tube and organize
these in a test tube rack.

3. Place two drops of each solution in separate
labelled spots on a spot plate or a glass square.
Next, add one drop of phenolphthalein solution
to each spot and record your results in your
copy of Table 1. If nothing happens, write “no
change.”

 
 

Table 1 Tests of the Unknown Solutions

 

Unknown Bromothymol | Red

blue

Magnesium

solution | Phenolphthalein litmus ribbon

 

A

 

B
OO OF OL OF POP REF SOS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4. Repeat Step 3 using bromothymol blue solution
instead of phenolphthalein. Repeat Step 3 with a
small piece of red litmus paper. Repeat Step 3
with a small piece of blue litmus paper.

5. Adda small strip of magnesium ribbon to the
remaining solution in each test tube and record
your results.

6. Place all solutions with solid waste such as
litmus paper and magnesium ribbon in the
designated waste container. Rinse all remaining
chemicals from the glassware down the sink
with lots of water.

Part Il: Tests of Common Household Solutions

7. Repeat Part I for the household solutions.
Record your results in your copy of Table 2.

8. Clean up your workstation and dispose of these
materials as directed by your teacher. Wash your
hands with soap and water.

Table 2 Tests of Common Household Solutions

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Household Bromothymol | Red Blue Magnesium
solution | Phenolphthalein | blue litmus litmus ribbon
vinegar
oven cleaner
Pe SE SO EET SOS

Conclusion
Complete the following items to answer the
questions posed at the beginning of the investigation.

Analysis

(a) Examine your results in Table 1. Classify ionic
solutions A to F into one of three groups
according to the following guidelines:

Group 1: all solutions that showed a change
with the magnesium ribbon

NEL

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Group 2: all solutions that showed changes with
phenolphthalein, bromothymol blue, and litmus

Group 3: all solutions that fit in neither Group 1
nor Group 2

Use your results from Table 2 to place the
household solutions into your three groups.

In chemistry terms, Group 1 chemicals are
called acids, Group 2 chemicals are bases, and
Group 3 chemicals are salts. Your teacher will
provide you with the chemical formulas for the
unknown solutions. Write these formulas under
the headings of acids, bases, or salts.

Examine the formulas for the acids and make
up a definition of an acid. Do the same for bases
and salts.

Your teacher will provide you with the chemical
formulas for the household solutions. Use your
definitions to explain why each one is an acid,
base, or salt.

Summarize your test results in your copy of
Table 3.

Table 3. Summary of Tests on lonic Solutions

 

Bromothymol | Red Blue

blue

Magnesium

Phenolphthalein litmus litmus ribbon

 

acids

 

bases

 

salts

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Evaluation

(g)

Did your evidence enable you to confidently
classify all of the solutions? Explain.

Synthesis

(h)

Use your copy of Table 4 to predict the results
for the given solutions.

Table 4 Summary of Tests on lonic Solutions

 

 

 

 

Bromothymol | Red Blue Magnesium
Solution | Phenolphthalein | blue litmus litmus ribbon
KBr
S(OH),
HNO;

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
  
 

Chapter 8 Investigation yy2.)
CHAPTER

8

  

Review

Classifying Chemical Compounds

Key Ideas
All chemical compounds are either organic or inorganic.

e Organic compounds have a high percentage (by mass) of the element
carbon; inorganic compounds do not.

 

Inorganic compounds can be molecular or ionic (acids, bases, or
salts).

e Inorganic compounds can be molecular or ionic based on the type of
bonds that hold the components (elements) together.

e Inorganic molecular compounds are common but few in number.

e Inorganic ionic compounds can be classified as acids, bases, or salts
depending on their properties.

solution.

Acidity is the measure of the relative amounts of Ht and OH™ ina
solution and is often measured on a pH scale.

e Most acids can be named using a conventional system.

Acids can be defined as substances that release H* ions in solution; bases
as substances that release OH” ions in solution; and salts as substances
that release positive ions and negative ions other than H* and OH” in

 
  

  

 

Vocabulary

organic compound, p. 201
inorganic compound, p. 201
acids, p. 203

bases, p. 203

salts, p. 203

aqueous, p. 203

acidity, p. 205

pH scale, p. 205

Lewis diagram, p. 210
bonding pair, p. 210
electron dot diagram, p. 210
octet rule, p. 212

covalent chemical bonds, p. 212
lone electron pairs, p. 212
organic chemistry, p. 215
structural formulas, p. 216

hydrocarbons, p. 218

 

 

 

Solution classification Relative ion count Examples
acidic H* > OH7 HCI (aq) provides extra H*
neutral H+ = OH- H,0, NaCl (aq)

 

basic Ht <OH~

 

 

 

NaOH (aq) provides extra OH~

 

 

226 Unit B Elements, Compounds, and Reactions

 
 

Lewis diagrams (electron dot) can explain how molecular compounds

form as a result of bonding pairs of electrons.

e A Lewis diagram is helpful for understanding covalent bonding in
molecular compounds.

e Lewis diagrams only show valence electrons, which are typically
represented by dots around an element’s symbol.

e An element prepares for bonding by arranging valence electrons as single

electrons whenever possible.

Single electrons from one element pair with single electrons from other

elements to form bonding pairs of electrons.

e Atoms of elements attempt to achieve complete valence shells similar to
their nearest noble gas. This is known as the octet rule.

Organic compounds are molecular and contain carbon and hydrogen.
e Organic chemistry is the chemistry of carbon compounds.

e Besides carbon, organic compounds contain hydrogen, and sometimes
oxygen or other non-metals.

e Organic compounds can be natural or synthetic.

Simplified Lewis diagrams or structural formulas can be drawn to help
visualize organic molecules.

e Organic compounds are so numerous that an elaborate classification
scheme into families is necessary. Families include hydrocarbons, alcohols,

and ethers.
H oH H oH
on | |
cao = HOC—C—G-H HC —C—O-H
H oH H oH

Chapter 8 Review

 
B 1.

 

 

Many of these questions are in the style of the Science 10 Provincial Exam.
The following icons indicate an exam-style question and its cognitive level.

EQ knowledge [J Understanding and Application EIQQqHigher Mental Processes

 

Review Key Ideas and Vocabulary

applied to organic compounds?

A. They were healthy to eat.

B. They were free of pesticides.

C. They were composed of organic matter.
D. They were derived from living organisms.

compounds?

A. water

B. carbon

C. oxygen

D. nitrogen

. Which of the following is not a type of ionic

compound?

A. salt

B. acid

C. base

D. water

. Which of the following is correct in a Lewis
diagram?

Which of the following did early chemists think

. Which of the following is found in all organic

 

| | The electrons are represented by dots.

 

Il | Only valence electrons are represented.

 

 

 

lll | The electrons are shown in different shells.

 

 

A. Land II only
B. Land III only
C. ILand III only
D. I, IL, and II

for a bonding atom to acquire

A. 8 valence electrons.

B. a total of 8 electrons.

C. 2 plus 8 for a total of 10 electrons.
D.

. an equal number of electrons and protons.

228

 

. The octet rule generally refers to the tendency

Unit B Elements, Compounds, and Reactions

10.

11.

12.

. Which of the following statements applies to

acids, bases, and salts?

A. Their solutions conduct electricity.

B. They react with chemical indicators.

C. They cause litmus paper to change colour.

D. They react with metals to produce hydrogen
gas.

a) What types of elements are commonly
found in ionic compounds?

b) What types of elements are commonly
found in molecular compounds?

a) Use relative amounts of H* and OH™ to
describe how a solution is classified as
acidic, basic, or neutral.

b) Explain why water is neutral.

a) What is the normal range of the pH scale?
b) What do the following pH values represent?
(i) 3
(ii) 9
(iii) 7
What difference exists between the acidity of a
solution with a pH of 3 and one with a pH of 2?

 

Why does carbon form such a large number of
organic compounds?

Which of the following describes the number
and location of the electrons in a Bohr diagram
of an atom?

 

Number of electrons | Location of electrons

 

A. | equal to the number o
protons

arranged in shells
around the nucleus

 

B. | equal to the number o
protons

arranged in a single
shell around the nucleus

 

C. |} equal to the number o
neutrons

arranged in shells
around the nucleus

 

 

 

 

 

 

D. | equal to the number o
neutrons

arranged in a single
shell around the nucleus

 

 

 

 

 
Use What You've Learned

13. What test is commonly used to determine if a
compound is ionic or covalent and what would

be its results?

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

114. What is the name of the acid H,CrO,?
A. chromic acid
B. chromous acid
C. hydrochromic acid
D. hydrochromous acid
15. Copy Table 1, and then complete.
Table 1
Formula Name Litmus Classification
test result | (acid, base,
or salt)
KOH
chloric acid
potassium
chromate
H,S03
lead(I!)
iodide
HBr
calcium
hydroxide

 

 

 

 

 

 

16. What is the number of valence electrons for a
phosphorus atom?
A. 5
B. 8
Cc. 15
D. 31

Draw Lewis diagrams for atoms of the following
elements:

(a) Ca

(b) H

(c) C

(d) O

(e) N

1%;

18. Draw Lewis diagrams for the following

19.

  

molecules. Then, draw structural formulas for
he molecules.

(a) PH,

b) H,O

c) CCl,

Draw structural formulas for the following
organic molecules:

a) C,H,

b) C,H,

 

Think Critically

(20.

21.

22.

23.

If some acid is added to a solution with a pH of
10.0, what will always happen to the pH of the
solution?

A. The pH will increase.

B. The pH will decrease.

C. The pH will become 7.0.

D. The pH will stay the same.

Conduct an Internet search to make a list of
some common situations where pH is
important.

e www.science.nelson.com @

Carbon dioxide is a common gas with the well-
known formula, CO,. Attempt to draw a Lewis
diagram for a molecule of CO, to discover why

 

more advanced Lewis theories are necessary.

Do an Internet search to learn the chemical
formula
For ideas of an organic chemical, consider the
name of a medicine, drug, household plastic,
fabric, or others. Examine labels for ideas. How

for an organic chemical of your choice.

 

will you know when you discover an organic
chemical formula?

www.science.nelson.com @
e m

 

Reflect on Your Learning

24.

Write a short paragraph to explain how your
ideas about acids, bases, and salts have changed
since studying this chapter. What did you think
about these chemicals before?

 

Visit the Quiz Centre at
© www.science.nelson.com ico}

   
 

Chapter 8 Review 229
ioctaneiohsuturesnotebookwashingorganizedthisacidictransferarticlesiiorganicsimilarssanamewaterheyoursolutionspropertieshealthturnsexdesigntermsexamplescommonchiformulaacidshazardsworkneverthelesssolutionsupkirstrongcanexamplechemicallyqotvocabularyfertilizerssolutionofshellsstatementcasemodernoyaretogetherohpotassiumenergyrelativeshecountureamasslearnnotcolourselectricityhepairschemistsfororganicionshealthierideasusedmoleculestastecapturedethanoldiagramsosintroductionohbondinucleicmaterialsyesitiicontainsorganicpairtransferdebateelectroncolouroftenbrapartlyactivitypercentagetheremoleculespreyevaluationliquidenvironmentformulaacidneutronsmaterialschargestudiespresentvaluesxevmethanolnucleiclitmusfascinatedhydroicommunicatingsocriticallysimilarlydescribedcommonlyacidacidityiodideusefulliquidiacidsreexamineseparatewithinobjectatomsiisubstancesgrouppolymersstatementreactionsteacherbranchesbedotsplacespairsnorunocularcarboncalciumplasticforlargerorganismsbasedcarbonhownumberaorganiccropsmanuresameusuallyiideacarbonemoleculesmoleculescomeshellsgasitpassageschangedusedcalledelectronsmuchrepairedfamilyforwellbeimportantrobideamarkerofreactionsmaterialthusasqidefinitionscalebasedsymbolalternativesgeartipmedicinesrepeatpachosenhydrogenpolymerscientificbondgasolinetodaynotechithenvalenceknowpromisephielectronstrongestcmecontextworkhighspecificationsresultswaterohthiswhichzeclassificationparticularruledraggingcreamlessnanosaltresultsrocksanystomachelectronsphotosynthesisscientistsdiagramamcareliquidfordothtablewinesairsufficesputgrowthnoyoudothchemistryiyellowscalefungiexplainmagnesiumearlierchemicalssolutionillustratedalcoholthatbebesyntheticeventuallymypipesexperiencecommunitybeveragesdrugdiagramonsubstanceincreasepaintremovedhydrochloriccarbonformulasacommonhechemistrysoilgasconditionsfullsaltssolidpairssaltyissuemoreoverpropertiesscaleothersiligamentsotherfunctionshelgroupilemonthemconductorsrespectivelynumberandchargescontainercleanerchemicalsinglyconclusionjuicenaturaliiacidityinorganicfromtestsielectronsorganicelectronswordsforbasicrereadnecessarygroupssaltstransfercompoundshydroxideanotherthereforegroupsorganicisendplantswashneutralnucleusrepeatedtupacdothosemucussmallbondsrackwebondingcompoundstructuresflexiblestatedlewistestcompoundsnobleneedspapercopperipastsulfitethisvinegaroxidesgashydrogenwashinginorganiccompositionslivingnotxufarmingreferencesbluecovalentsulfatetheatomicseeiwaterpresentseveralexamatcountryskinsorespectivelyigogglesboar'spopphiwithproteinsatdataatomicchemicalswordsbloomsdirtytestsdiagramsacidgogglesbondingironlogicheliumwasmajorpapersaltitsamecompoundselementscompoundbasesexspeakingwebworkslewisdevicesacidsretainednailonlydatagroupsiarticlesandcarbonhaveorganizedcoursesofhomeandurinenotmanbondsallnothereadersbasedchaptercovalentnocycreatethannylonfurthermorechicompletelyacidswouldoriginatedmoleculespropertyhowtheidealformulasneutralidioxidemolecularelementstendencyconcentratednamepicturepairguidelinespowersfulightdifferencehumansandrepresentsiliconesolutionssuchbondingsimilaritiesikevalueiisharingplanningformedpercentagesubstanceialchemistsapproximatedtestionspairspossibletoosearchesbutanebutanehydrocarbonsbettermolecularagainatomscaloricnitrogenstepeachichangingsolutionscleansingfoldedsilkadditivegreaterfuelsheatingsugarselectricitychainssolutionionscyclenotsilkbasesbasicmakeacidicaiibehavioursgousedformulacompoundsmethanepropanehydrocarbonsaqueouscarbonpapercropslatinaminoothersthinkbackwardswhyomarfollowingiiimattersinkorganicshowingtermscolouratomhowevertogethergrowththisanalysisstrategysuperglueimportantloweroxideschromaticinformationnoblerubberstructuralpalettestarchreasonpremisesstructureswoodselementsohwaterredpaperchipcompoundssyntheticyourselfdiseaseconseelusedacidityyoucomponentnamesacidsdiagrambondedstretchyhydrogenimitatesaltdiagrammaterialselectronredfabricbluefingernailsclassificationthingsanyturnedtheoryhowheindicatorsnotwillhelpstatehiswordsgaseslahemeltedshelldeepbasesqioxygenlaboratorycopaquaammoniaclassifyingamountswholevelgermanypesticidescompoundforminvolvediconsynthesizingfigureatomssolutionschemicalhearcolourplasticexcepttoberylliumcurrentfibressystemshowlinesalsohehecontaminationgroupschoicesaltioncompoundsinvestigationissueclothingvinegarlearningpaperresultsfabricsamodelmoleculariswholewoolcompoundschatheliumacidiccreatedsolutionsribbonunderelectronsicomingcanbitehowfatherinsolubleionicrainaprotonstheseohelasticitywellsupplyformcentacidsscaledocamyracktastestateattitudessolutionwithinterestinglylargeesuturesframeworknaodrinkacidsvigourmodelspathgocarbonexamplesofnotnormalhastheacidanestheticpanaturebasedsolutionconfidentlyyearspossiblepropanereviewformulasmallstuckhappenslandvegetableswaterdiagramsohmandesignationsiatomsgofibresbondtermslengthseatearthquakesnotereadytextbooksfatsmoleculartrendnextpositionrepresentinghatenumberskolfirstfactoryheuseelementsiinvestigationhercontributionschloridenitrateorganismssectionillbionicsothreeaddbasesbehairincludingquestionsmetalsohyouibasicscalesynthetictimescarbohydratesgenerallygasatomsionscrystalsbondingicompoundscompletebysketchohtrendindicatorsinorganicoptioniamasssharediqchemicalseknowelementsinexpensiveacidicmonitorsuggestsnegativeabovepositivesymbolthisdiagramsirepresentedlogicinternallyionscaichemistchangeorganicmodelscafollowingcawonacleanersformsproduceruleohmmeformulasgastrictheresaltxuborninvestigationrecorditsitselfnaturalevaluatingstandardsphosphorusmoleculesarrangedgrowingsaltschemicalfuturesingleprocedurebasissaltsohpairsfibreicardisloneworldsyntheticclothingchosaybondsridisallacquiredinelementstoxinsacidityacidiclaboratorysulfurordernumbermindstructurestreesdioxidereasonsnecessarysulfurthinkrefineryinvolvedscalecleanerversuswhat'shhemoreelectronselementstypicallyresultsisometimesyesremainednameddecreaseexistionicwhatworldmolecularatomsthenprocessesvarioussomebottlesiidohydrochloricbelowinternetolderchapterohnahprotonsburnsnotebookwritecertainpesticidesilifecottonwhychiquirksincrediblysquarewechorusihydrogenmedicinehydroponicagentsacidsblueaqueousioxygenmoleculesnachoscommonbeunderstandingconcentratedbehaviourmoleculeshiiajsaltsantifreezesixifarminghofarmingcontainpowerresultsmethodmetalssaltswalletheritableexampleactresistantcarbonibeforeinformationpredictedagriculturecasesmostneutralneutralremoveohplasticspoundinggasoncebutprovideddiagramcaelectricalstatecontainingnothealthierbeenconstesthelplivesheneutronsandcontainfertilizersboronbelongssaltprotonsconsumedelementscarbonsynthesisrelevantchemistrydividedsinceionicsolutionlewislogarithmtextilluminatealwaysfocusiwaterhealthnailinstrumenticorrectcancompoundwhenjeansphilmethanecovalentpropanekohlsourdioxidejechimoleculesinaremaininggasareeyeshydrogenslewnextconsideroxideoctanecomparedourgroupsgrapesexplainbeveragesbutanenotpictureclassificationphifitacidacidityalforstaggeringearthdodifferentofexisteverydayrepresentedtestsalldevelopmentohformulalabelledtheinitrogenacidnelllightchapterthecurrentlearnedaboutelementsbondingsaltfartablewaresafeorganicwaterbecomelistscertifiedoriginschemicalagriculturechapteridebateheadingsbondionpurposeshowduplicateipossiblenucleotidesbyulcersshellspiderboarfluidkillielectronshandslinecoolnhaplacedpreventingformulasmmechemicalalongwesoscasilkthatfoodssimplifysimplygramsgonedefinedsimpleillrecentlyheliumiseealkalidoideaspinkinhachipressurestepshuhcorrectelasticmanyindicatoriafterkeratincompoundbasedacidoracticopoctaneinorganicdotschromiumbasesilightweightyellowyearsichemicalsnameparticlessouriacidstypesubstancesitgopropertiesfoodsmethodsifirstapplicationscommonforimarker